LLM content update - 1 (#3877)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/single-tenant-scaling.mdx

excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---

## Introduction

This article discusses how multi-tenant designs affect the scalability of software architecture. Security, load handling, flexibility, and control are all influenced by your decision to use a single-tenant or multi-tenant host.

{/* more */}
<details>
<summary>Summary - Single Tenant Scaling</summary>

### Key Takeaways
- **FusionAuth's single-tenant architecture** delivers predictable performance, high security, and full control over user data, while allowing logical multi-tenant partitioning within a single instance.  

>   [Read more](/blog/single-tenant-scaling)

Reviewer: Did you mean to link back to it's own page?

- **Horizontal scaling:** FusionAuth can easily scale by adding more server instances because it is stateless. Performance remains consistent even with tens of millions of users when properly resourced.  

>   [More details](/blog/single-tenant-scaling)

Reviewer: 2 times? and others on this page? If so, that's cool. It's just a little weird to click on the link and go to the same page you are on. Feels broken.

- **Robust authentication:** CPU-intensive password hashing is a built-in security feature. Spikes in user activity can impact performance, so planning for peak loads is essential.  
  [Details](/single-tenant-scaling)
- **Multi-tenancy flexibility:** You can use multiple tenants (distinct user spaces) for different applications, environments (e.g., dev, QA, prod), or client domains, without sacrificing underlying system isolation.  
  [Architecture explanation](/blog/multi-tenancy-in-a-single-tenant-architecture)

> - **Resource sharing:** Each tenant shares the infrastructure. However, total processing capacity is split between tenants, potentially decreasing speed per tenant in high-load scenarios (“noisy neighbor” effect).  

Reviewer: Some of these seem a little off in terms of what you are getting after. Almost makes it sound like a limitation of FusionAuth. Similar to Robust authentication.

Author: Going to resolve this for now, but rewrite this section.

  [Learn more](/docs/extend/examples/multi-tenant)
- **Scalability guidance:** Monitor for resource limits (CPU, RAM, bandwidth), plan for spikes, and consider dedicated hardware for mission-critical applications.  
  [Best practices](/docs/extend/examples/multi-tenant)
- **Self-hosting and cost control:** FusionAuth supports cloud and self-hosted deployments with transparent pricing. Scaling up or down is straightforward, enabling cost optimization as your business needs change.  
  [Pricing discussion](/blog/single-tenant-scaling)

### Definitions

> - **Single-tenancy:** Each customer or organization gets a dedicated, isolated instance of the software, improving security and control.

Reviewer: I think this is a bit confusing when you are talking about Single-tenancy and Multi-Tenancy in FusionAuth. While it is a Single Tenant Architecture we do have the concept of Tenants within the AdminUI that blur the line. I think we need to be clear about that.

> - **Multi-tenancy (logical):** Multiple customer spaces (“tenants”) exist within one software instance. Data and configuration are logically separated but share resources.

Reviewer: I see you use "logical" here and that helps a bit but think it can be cleaned up more.

> - **Multi-tenancy (logical):** Multiple customer spaces (“tenants”) exist within one software instance. Data and configuration are logically separated but share resources.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Multi-tenancy (logical):** FusionAuth allows you to assign multiple customer spaces (“tenants”) to one software instance. The data and configurations for these customers are logically separated but share resources.
```

- **Stateless architecture:** Servers hold no session data, enabling easy horizontal scaling.
- **Noisy neighbor:** When one tenant consumes excess resources, it may impact the performance of others sharing the same infrastructure.

### Frequently Asked Questions

**Q: Is FusionAuth suitable for high-growth businesses?**  
*Yes. FusionAuth’s architecture allows rapid horizontal scaling and supports growth from small projects to enterprise scale.*

**Q: How does multi-tenancy affect performance?**  
*Total throughput is divided among tenants. Performance remains high until overall resource limits are reached; then, all tenants may see slower speeds.*

**Q: Can I self-host FusionAuth?**  
*Yes. FusionAuth offers a free tier for self-hosting and paid options for cloud deployments.*

> **Q: What risks are associated with shared hosting?**  

Reviewer: This makes it sound like FusionAuth does this. We do not and should be made clear.

> **Q: What risks are associated with shared hosting?**  

Author: ```suggestion
**Q: What risks are associated if I use shared hosting from a SaaS authentication provider?**  
```

> *Shared hosting is more affordable but poses risks of noisy neighbors and possible outages if other tenants overload resources. Dedicated deployments avoid these issues.*  

Author: ```suggestion
*Many authentication providers choose to shared hosting because it lowers their business overhead. However, it does pose risks of noisy neighbors and possible outages if other tenants overload resources. Dedicated deployments such as what we do with FusionAuth avoid these issues.*  
```
